---

layout: post

title:       "API vs SPI"
description: "API is a mean for accessing a provided service/function, SPI is way to inject, extend or alter the behavior."

categories: [software development]
tags:       [api, spi]

resources:
  - "[Blogger.com / mussabsharif](http://mussabsharif.blogspot.ro/2011/08/api-vs-spi.html)"
  - "[Stack Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2954372/difference-between-spi-and-api)"

---


API is a mean for accessing a provided service/function, SPI is way to inject, extend or alter the behavior.

**API** stands for [Application Programming Interface](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Application_programming_interface), and is a mean for accessing a service/function provided by some kind of software or a platform. API is normally target for clients to access a service and its has the following properties:
- API is a programmatic way of accessing a service to achieve a certain behavior or output;
- from API evolution point of view, addition is no problem at all for clients;
- but API's once utilized by clients it can not (and should not) be altered / deleted unless there are an appropriate communications, since its a complete degradation of the client expectation.

**SPI** stands for [Service Provider Interface](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Service_provider_interface), and is way to inject, extend or alter the behavior for software or a platform. SPI is targeted for providers and has the following properties:
- SPI is a way to extend / alter the behavior of a software or a platform (programmable vs. programmatic);
- SPI evolution is different that API evolution, in SPI removal is not an issue;
- addition of SPI interfaces will cause problems and may break existing implementations.

Put differently, the API tells you what a specific class/method does for you and the SPI tells you what you must do to conform. So:
- the **API** is the description of classes/interfaces/methods/... that you **call and use** to achieve a goal;
- the **SPI** is the description of classes/interfaces/methods/... that you **extend and implement** to achieve a goal.

Usually API and SPI are separate. For example in JDBC the [Driver](http://java.sun.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/sql/Driver.html) class is part of the SPI: if you simply want to use JDBC, you don't need to use it directly, but everyone who implements a JDBC driver must implement that class.

Sometimes they overlap, however. The [Connection](http://java.sun.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/sql/Connection.html) interface is both SPI and API: you use it routinely when you use a JDBC driver and it needs to be implemented by the developer of the JDBC driver.
